doc/user/content/sql/create-source/s3.md, before:

---
title: "CREATE SOURCE: S3"
description: "Connecting Materialize to an S3 bucket"
draft: true
#menu:
#  main:
#    parent: 'create-source'
#    name: S3
#    weight: 30
aliases:
    - /sql/create-source/s3-source
    - /sql/create-source/json-s3
    - /sql/create-source/text-s3
    - /sql/create-source/csv-s3
---

[//]: # "NOTE(morsapaes) Once we're ready to bring the S3 source back, check #12991 to restore the previous docs state."

{{< beta />}}

{{% create-source/intro %}}
This page describes how to connect Materialize to an S3 bucket to ingest the objects stored in it and/or listen to new object created events.
{{% /create-source/intro %}}

## Syntax

{{< diagram "create-source-s3.svg" >}}

#### `format_spec`

{{< diagram "s3-format-spec.svg" >}}

#### `with_options`

{{< diagram "with-options-aws.svg" >}}

#### `static_credentials`

{{< diagram "with-options-aws-static.svg" >}}

{{% create-source/syntax-connector-details connector="s3" envelopes="append-only" %}}

### `WITH` options

Field                                | Value     | Description
-------------------------------------|-----------|-------------------------------------
`timestamp_frequency_ms`             | `int`     | Default: `1000`. Sets the timestamping frequency in `ms`. Reflects how frequently the source advances its timestamp. This measure reflects how stale data in views will be. Lower values result in more-up-to-date views but may reduce throughput.


## Supported formats

|<div style="width:290px">Format</div>   | [Append-only envelope] | [Upsert envelope] | [Debezium envelope] |
-----------------------------------------|:----------------------:|:-----------------:|:-------------------:|
| [JSON]                                 | ✓                      |                   |                     |
| [Text/bytes]                           | ✓                      |                   |                     |
| [CSV]                                  | ✓                      |                   |                     |

## Features

Materialize supports two strategies for object discovery: [listing bucket objects](#listing-bucket-objects) and [listening to SQS notifications](#listening-to-sqs-notifications).

Both strategies follow the same basic pattern:

* Obtain a list of objects.
* Deduplicate objects so the same object is never downloaded twice.
* Filter the list of objects against any [
  patterns](#patterns) provided in the `MATCHING` clause.
* Download the matching objects.
* Treat each object downloaded as a newline-delimited file for the purposes of record
  delineation.

You may specify multiple strategies within a single `CREATE SOURCE` statement. For example, this is a valid `DISCOVER OBJECTS` clause:

```sql
DISCOVER OBJECTS USING
  BUCKET SCAN 'example-1',
  BUCKET SCAN 'example-2',
  SQS NOTIFICATIONS 'example-notifications'
```

#### Patterns

It's possible to filter the list of object keys to download using Unix-style glob syntax as an
argument in the `MATCHING` clause:

* `?` matches any single character except `/`.
* `*` matches zero or more characters except `/`.
* `**` recursively matches directories, but some other pattern must be specified. For example,
  `a/**` matches anything inside of the `a/` prefix, but not `a/` itself); and `**/a` matches `a`
  in any prefix, but not `a` with no prefix.
* `{a,b}` matches `a` or `b`, where `a` and `b` are arbitrary glob patterns.
* `[ab]` matches `a` or `b` where `a` and `b` are characters. Prepend `!` to the matched
  characters to invert the match. For example, `[!ab]` matches any character besides `a` or `b`.
* You can escape metacharacters (such as `*` and `?`) using character class notation. For example, `[*]`
  matches `*`.

##### Pattern examples

| Pattern            | Example matches     | Example excludes                           |
|--------------------|---------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| `**`               | `a` , `a/b/c.json`  | none                                       |
| `2020/**/*.json`   | `2020/11/uuid.json` | `data/2020/uuid.json` , `2020/11/uuid.csv` |
| `*`                | `a`                 | `a/b`                                      |
| `202{0,1}/*/*.csv` | `2020/11/data.csv`  | `2022/11/data.csv` , `2020/11/01/data.csv` |

### Listing bucket objects

The `BUCKET SCAN` discovery strategy performs a single scan over the specified bucket at source creation
time:

```sql
CREATE SOURCE csv_source
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.csv' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT CSV WITH 1 COLUMNS;
```

For an S3 source to ingest objects that are added to the bucket **after** the
source is created, you must additionally configure an `SQS NOTIFICATIONS` discovery strategy on the source.

### Listening to SQS notifications

Materialize can listen to **new object created** events in an S3 bucket through the [S3 Event Notifications API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/NotificationHowTo.html).

To get new object notifications, the specified bucket must be configured to publish `s3:ObjectCreated:*` event notifications to an SQS queue. Once this is set up, you can point Materialize at the SQS queue using the `DISCOVER OBJECTS USING SQS NOTIFICATIONS` syntax:

```sql
CREATE SOURCE csv_source
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.csv' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics',
    SQS NOTIFICATIONS 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT CSV WITH 1 COLUMNS;
```

For more details on configuring a bucket for notifications, follow the step-by-step instructions in the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/ways-to-add-notification-config-to-bucket.html).

#### Configuring an SNS topic

Materialize deletes SQS messages as soon as they are ingested. This means that the same SQS queue
**cannot** be used in multiple sources.

If you'd like to have multiple sources listening to
notifications from the same bucket, you must [configure an SNS topic](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/ways-to-add-notification-config-to-bucket.html#step1-create-sns-topic-for-notification) as an intermediary, with
multiple SQS queues subscribed to it (one per source). These queues must be configured to use [raw message delivery](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sns/latest/dg/sns-large-payload-raw-message-delivery.html).


Since Materialize treats unmaterialized sources with multiple downstream views as separate sources,
SQS notifications can not be shared across multiple materializations of the same source. You must
create separate SQS queues for each S3 notification source.

## Authentication

{{% specifying-aws-credentials %}}

#### Permissions required

The permissions required for the IAM User or Role used by `materialized` depend on the strategy specified for [object discovery](#features).

For example, since the `BUCKET SCAN` strategy must perform repeated `ListObjects` actions to create a list of key names to download, you must grant the Materialize IAM User or Role the `ListObjects` permission before you specify `DISCOVER OBJECTS USING BUCKET SCAN`.

| Object discovery strategy | Permissions required                                                                     |
|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| All                   | [`GetObject` permission](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_GetObject.html) for the objects to be downloaded              |
| **BUCKET SCAN**       | [`ListObject` permission](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_ListObjectsV2.html) for the buckets to be scanned, **unless** the `MATCHING` pattern can only match a single object. In such cases, Materialize will perform only the necessary `GetObject` API call. |
| **SQS NOTIFICATIONS** | `ChangeMessageVisibility`, `DeleteMessage`, `GetQueueUrl`, `ReceiveMessage` [SQS Permissions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/service-authorization/latest/reference/list_amazonsqs.html) for the queue Materialize will listen to |

## Examples

### Creating a source

{{< tabs tabID="1" >}}
{{< tab "JSON">}}

Assuming there is an S3 bucket `analytics` that contains the following keys and
associated content:

**users/2021/usage.json**
```json
{"user_id": 9999, "disks_used": 2, "cpu_used_minutes": 3600}
{"user_id": 888, "disks_used": 0}
{"user_id": 777, "disks_used": 25, "cpu_used_minutes": 9200}
```

**users/2020/usage.json**
```json
{"user_id": 9999, "disks_used": 150, "cpu_used_minutes": 400100}
{"user_id": 888, "disks_used": 0}
{"user_id": 777, "disks_used": 12, "cpu_used_minutes": 999900}
```

To load all the keys:

```sql
CREATE SOURCE json_source
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.json' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT BYTES;
```

This creates a source that...

- Lazily scans the entire `analytics` bucket looking for objects that have keys that end with
  `*.json` -- this source is not **MATERIALIZED**, so nothing has happened yet and it cannot be
  queried.
- Has one *text* column `text` and one automatically-generated *integer* column `mz_record` which
  reflects the order that materialized first encountered that row in.

To access the data as JSON, you can then use standard JSON [functions](/sql/functions/#json-func) and
[operators](/sql/functions/#json):

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW jsonified_s3_source AS
  SELECT
    data->>'user_id' AS user_id,
    data->>'disks_used' AS disks_used,
    data->>'cpu_used_minutes' AS cpu_used_minutes
  FROM (SELECT text::jsonb AS data FROM json_source);
```

This creates a view that...

- Has three *string* columns (`user_id`, `disks_used`, and `cpu_used_minutes`).
- Is **MATERIALIZED**, so will be cached in memory and is immediately queryable.

{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab "Text/bytes">}}

Assuming there is an S3 bucket `frontend` that contains the following keys and associated
content:

**logs/2020/12/31/frontend.log**
```text
99.99.44.44 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:59 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
80.91.33.133 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:02 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Rust/reqwest 0.3"
173.203.139.108 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:07 +0000] "GET /wpadmin HTTP/1.1" 404 332 "-" "Firefox 9000"
173.203.139.108 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:14 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 404 334 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
99.99.44.44 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:01 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
80.91.33.133 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:41 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Rust/reqwest 0.3"
37.26.93.214 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:52 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 3318 "-" "Go 1.1 package http"
```

**logs/2021/01/01/frontend.log**
```text
99.99.44.44 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:41 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
188.138.60.101 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:48 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
46.50.21.83 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:02 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Python/Requests 22.01"
99.99.44.44 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:25 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
91.239.186.133 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:04 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
173.203.139.108 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:08 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
80.91.33.133 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:04 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Rust/reqwest 0.3"
93.190.71.150 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:33 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
91.234.194.89 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:57 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
46.4.83.163 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:20 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
173.203.139.108 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:39 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 404 335 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
```

#### `TEXT` format

To create a source that ingests these logs and allows you to do some
quick and dirty analysis:

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED SOURCE frontend_logs
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING 'logs/202?/**/*.log' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'frontend'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT TEXT;
```

From here, you can e.g. get all the lines that include the string `updates`, ordered by the original position of the line in the file (`mz_record`):

```sql
SELECT mz_record,
       text
FROM frontend_logs
WHERE text LIKE '%updates%'
ORDER BY mz_record;

 mz_record |                                     text
 1         | 99.99.44.44 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:59] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
 7         | 37.26.93.214 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:52] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 3318 "-" "Go_1.1_package_http"
 8         | 99.99.44.44 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:41] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
 9         | 188.138.60.101 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:48] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
 12        | 91.239.186.133 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:04] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
 15        | 93.190.71.150 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:33] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
 16        | 91.234.194.89 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:57] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
```

#### `REGEX` format

It's generally more convenient to work with well-structured columnar data, so you
can use the `REGEX` format specifier instead:

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED SOURCE frontend_logs
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING 'logs/202?/**/*.log' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'frontend'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT REGEX '(?P<ip>[^ ]+) - - \[?P<dt>([^]]_)\] "(?P<method>\w+) (?P<path>[^ ]+)[^"]+" (?P<status>\d+) (?P<content_length>\d+) "-" "(?P<user_agent>[^"]+)"';
```

From here, you can e.g. get all the lines that have `/updates` as the exact path:

```sql
SELECT dt,
       ip,
       user_agent
FROM frontend_logs
WHERE path = '/updates';

       dt           |      ip        |    user_agent
01/01/2021:00:00:04 | 91.239.186.133 | Python/Requests 22
01/01/2021:00:00:33 | 93.190.71.150  | Python/Requests 22
01/01/2021:00:00:41 | 99.99.44.44    | Python/Requests 22
01/01/2021:00:00:48 | 188.138.60.101 | Python/Requests 22
01/01/2021:00:00:57 | 91.234.194.89  | Python/Requests 22
12/31/2020:23:55:52 | 37.26.93.214   | Go 1.1 package http
12/31/2020:23:55:59 | 99.99.44.44    | Python/Requests 22
```

{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab "CSV">}}

#### With a CSV header

Assuming there is an S3 bucket `analytics` that contains the following keys and
associated content:

**users/2021/engagement-with-header.csv**
```csv
id,status,active time
9999,active,8 hours
888,inactive,
777,active,3 hours
```

**users/2020/engagement-with-header.csv**
```csv
id,status,active time
9999,active,750 hours
888,inactive,
777,active,1002 hours
```

To validate and remove header rows
when reading from an S3 bucket, you can use the `FORMAT CSV WITH HEADER (column, column2, ...)` syntax. The column names are required for S3 sources, unlike file sources.
To load all the keys:

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED SOURCE csv_example (user_id, status, usage) -- provide SQL names
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.csv' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT CSV WITH HEADER (id, status, "active time"); -- expect a header for each file with these names
```

#### Without a CSV header

Assuming there is an S3 bucket `analytics` that contains the following keys and
associated content:

**users/2021/engagement.csv**
```csv
9999,active,8 hours
888,inactive,
777,active,3 hours
```

**users/2020/engagement.csv**
```csv
9999,active,750 hours
888,inactive,
777,active,1002 hours
```

To load all the keys:

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED SOURCE csv_example (user_id, status, usage)
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.csv' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT CSV WITH 3 COLUMNS;
```

This creates a source that...

- Scans the entire `analytics` bucket looking for objects that have keys ending with `*.csv`
- Has three *text* columns: `user_id`, `status`, and `usage`; and one automatically-generated
  *integer* column (`mz_record`) which reflects the order that materialized first encountered that
  row in.

  Lines in any object that do not have three columns will be ignored and an error-level message
  will be written to the Materialize log.
- Materializes the contents in memory immediately upon issuing the command.

To handle well-typed data while stripping out some uninteresting columns, you can
instead write an unmaterialized source and parse columns in a materialized view:

```sql
CREATE SOURCE csv_source (user_id, status, usage)
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.csv' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT CSV WITH 3 COLUMNS;
```

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW csv_example AS
  SELECT user_id::int4,
         usage::interval
  FROM csv_source;
```

This creates a view that has the same properties as above, except it...

- Has two columns (one *integer*, one *interval*)
- Does not store the string data in memory after it's been parsed.

{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Known limitations

##### Supported envelopes

S3 sources are append-only, which means that Materialize silently ignores any deleted or updated objects.

##### Ordering guarantees

Object ingest order is not guaranteed, and Materialize may interleave multiple object ingestion to speed things up.

## Related pages

- [`CREATE SOURCE`](../)
- [`CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW`](../../create-view)
- [`SELECT`](../../select)

[JSON]: /sql/create-source/#json
[Text/bytes]: /sql/create-source/#textbytes
[CSV]: /sql/create-source/#csv

[Append-only envelope]: /sql/create-source/#append-only-envelope
[Upsert envelope]: /sql/create-source/#upsert-envelope
[Debezium envelope]: /sql/create-source/#debezium-envelope

Commit message:

doc/user: remove traces of `MATERIALIZED SOURCE` from documentation (#13659)

doc/user/content/sql/create-source/s3.md, after:

---
title: "CREATE SOURCE: S3"
description: "Connecting Materialize to an S3 bucket"
draft: true
#menu:
#  main:
#    parent: 'create-source'
#    name: S3
#    weight: 30
aliases:
    - /sql/create-source/s3-source
    - /sql/create-source/json-s3
    - /sql/create-source/text-s3
    - /sql/create-source/csv-s3
---

[//]: # "NOTE(morsapaes) Once we're ready to bring the S3 source back, check #12991 to restore the previous docs state and review references to (un)materialized sources."

{{< beta />}}

{{% create-source/intro %}}
This page describes how to connect Materialize to an S3 bucket to ingest the objects stored in it and/or listen to new object created events.
{{% /create-source/intro %}}

## Syntax

{{< diagram "create-source-s3.svg" >}}

#### `format_spec`

{{< diagram "s3-format-spec.svg" >}}

#### `with_options`

{{< diagram "with-options-aws.svg" >}}

#### `static_credentials`

{{< diagram "with-options-aws-static.svg" >}}

{{% create-source/syntax-connector-details connector="s3" envelopes="append-only" %}}

### `WITH` options

Field                                | Value     | Description
-------------------------------------|-----------|-------------------------------------
`timestamp_frequency_ms`             | `int`     | Default: `1000`. Sets the timestamping frequency in `ms`. Reflects how frequently the source advances its timestamp. This measure reflects how stale data in views will be. Lower values result in more-up-to-date views but may reduce throughput.


## Supported formats

|<div style="width:290px">Format</div>   | [Append-only envelope] | [Upsert envelope] | [Debezium envelope] |
-----------------------------------------|:----------------------:|:-----------------:|:-------------------:|
| [JSON]                                 | ✓                      |                   |                     |
| [Text/bytes]                           | ✓                      |                   |                     |
| [CSV]                                  | ✓                      |                   |                     |

## Features

Materialize supports two strategies for object discovery: [listing bucket objects](#listing-bucket-objects) and [listening to SQS notifications](#listening-to-sqs-notifications).

Both strategies follow the same basic pattern:

* Obtain a list of objects.
* Deduplicate objects so the same object is never downloaded twice.
* Filter the list of objects against any [
  patterns](#patterns) provided in the `MATCHING` clause.
* Download the matching objects.
* Treat each object downloaded as a newline-delimited file for the purposes of record
  delineation.

You may specify multiple strategies within a single `CREATE SOURCE` statement. For example, this is a valid `DISCOVER OBJECTS` clause:

```sql
DISCOVER OBJECTS USING
  BUCKET SCAN 'example-1',
  BUCKET SCAN 'example-2',
  SQS NOTIFICATIONS 'example-notifications'
```

#### Patterns

It's possible to filter the list of object keys to download using Unix-style glob syntax as an
argument in the `MATCHING` clause:

* `?` matches any single character except `/`.
* `*` matches zero or more characters except `/`.
* `**` recursively matches directories, but some other pattern must be specified. For example,
  `a/**` matches anything inside of the `a/` prefix, but not `a/` itself); and `**/a` matches `a`
  in any prefix, but not `a` with no prefix.
* `{a,b}` matches `a` or `b`, where `a` and `b` are arbitrary glob patterns.
* `[ab]` matches `a` or `b` where `a` and `b` are characters. Prepend `!` to the matched
  characters to invert the match. For example, `[!ab]` matches any character besides `a` or `b`.
* You can escape metacharacters (such as `*` and `?`) using character class notation. For example, `[*]`
  matches `*`.

##### Pattern examples

| Pattern            | Example matches     | Example excludes                           |
|--------------------|---------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| `**`               | `a` , `a/b/c.json`  | none                                       |
| `2020/**/*.json`   | `2020/11/uuid.json` | `data/2020/uuid.json` , `2020/11/uuid.csv` |
| `*`                | `a`                 | `a/b`                                      |
| `202{0,1}/*/*.csv` | `2020/11/data.csv`  | `2022/11/data.csv` , `2020/11/01/data.csv` |

### Listing bucket objects

The `BUCKET SCAN` discovery strategy performs a single scan over the specified bucket at source creation
time:

```sql
CREATE SOURCE csv_source
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.csv' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT CSV WITH 1 COLUMNS;
```

For an S3 source to ingest objects that are added to the bucket **after** the
source is created, you must additionally configure an `SQS NOTIFICATIONS` discovery strategy on the source.

### Listening to SQS notifications

Materialize can listen to **new object created** events in an S3 bucket through the [S3 Event Notifications API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/NotificationHowTo.html).

To get new object notifications, the specified bucket must be configured to publish `s3:ObjectCreated:*` event notifications to an SQS queue. Once this is set up, you can point Materialize at the SQS queue using the `DISCOVER OBJECTS USING SQS NOTIFICATIONS` syntax:

```sql
CREATE SOURCE csv_source
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.csv' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics',
    SQS NOTIFICATIONS 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT CSV WITH 1 COLUMNS;
```

For more details on configuring a bucket for notifications, follow the step-by-step instructions in the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/ways-to-add-notification-config-to-bucket.html).

#### Configuring an SNS topic

Materialize deletes SQS messages as soon as they are ingested. This means that the same SQS queue
**cannot** be used in multiple sources.

If you'd like to have multiple sources listening to
notifications from the same bucket, you must [configure an SNS topic](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/ways-to-add-notification-config-to-bucket.html#step1-create-sns-topic-for-notification) as an intermediary, with
multiple SQS queues subscribed to it (one per source). These queues must be configured to use [raw message delivery](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sns/latest/dg/sns-large-payload-raw-message-delivery.html).

Since Materialize treats unmaterialized sources with multiple downstream views as separate sources,
SQS notifications can not be shared across multiple materializations of the same source. You must
create separate SQS queues for each S3 notification source.

## Authentication

{{% specifying-aws-credentials %}}

#### Permissions required

The permissions required for the IAM User or Role used by `materialized` depend on the strategy specified for [object discovery](#features).

For example, since the `BUCKET SCAN` strategy must perform repeated `ListObjects` actions to create a list of key names to download, you must grant the Materialize IAM User or Role the `ListObjects` permission before you specify `DISCOVER OBJECTS USING BUCKET SCAN`.

| Object discovery strategy | Permissions required                                                                     |
|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| All                   | [`GetObject` permission](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_GetObject.html) for the objects to be downloaded              |
| **BUCKET SCAN**       | [`ListObject` permission](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_ListObjectsV2.html) for the buckets to be scanned, **unless** the `MATCHING` pattern can only match a single object. In such cases, Materialize will perform only the necessary `GetObject` API call. |
| **SQS NOTIFICATIONS** | `ChangeMessageVisibility`, `DeleteMessage`, `GetQueueUrl`, `ReceiveMessage` [SQS Permissions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/service-authorization/latest/reference/list_amazonsqs.html) for the queue Materialize will listen to |

## Examples

### Creating a source

{{< tabs tabID="1" >}}
{{< tab "JSON">}}

Assuming there is an S3 bucket `analytics` that contains the following keys and
associated content:

**users/2021/usage.json**
```json
{"user_id": 9999, "disks_used": 2, "cpu_used_minutes": 3600}
{"user_id": 888, "disks_used": 0}
{"user_id": 777, "disks_used": 25, "cpu_used_minutes": 9200}
```

**users/2020/usage.json**
```json
{"user_id": 9999, "disks_used": 150, "cpu_used_minutes": 400100}
{"user_id": 888, "disks_used": 0}
{"user_id": 777, "disks_used": 12, "cpu_used_minutes": 999900}
```

To load all the keys:

```sql
CREATE SOURCE json_source
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.json' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT BYTES;
```

This creates a source that...

- Lazily scans the entire `analytics` bucket looking for objects that have keys that end with
  `*.json` -- this source is not **MATERIALIZED**, so nothing has happened yet and it cannot be
  queried.
- Has one *text* column `text` and one automatically-generated *integer* column `mz_record` which
  reflects the order that materialized first encountered that row in.

To access the data as JSON, you can then use standard JSON [functions](/sql/functions/#json-func) and
[operators](/sql/functions/#json):

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW jsonified_s3_source AS
  SELECT
    data->>'user_id' AS user_id,
    data->>'disks_used' AS disks_used,
    data->>'cpu_used_minutes' AS cpu_used_minutes
  FROM (SELECT text::jsonb AS data FROM json_source);
```

This creates a view that...

- Has three *string* columns (`user_id`, `disks_used`, and `cpu_used_minutes`).
- Is **MATERIALIZED**, so will be cached in memory and is immediately queryable.

{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab "Text/bytes">}}

Assuming there is an S3 bucket `frontend` that contains the following keys and associated
content:

**logs/2020/12/31/frontend.log**
```text
99.99.44.44 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:59 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
80.91.33.133 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:02 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Rust/reqwest 0.3"
173.203.139.108 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:07 +0000] "GET /wpadmin HTTP/1.1" 404 332 "-" "Firefox 9000"
173.203.139.108 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:14 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 404 334 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
99.99.44.44 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:01 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
80.91.33.133 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:41 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Rust/reqwest 0.3"
37.26.93.214 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:52 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 3318 "-" "Go 1.1 package http"
```

**logs/2021/01/01/frontend.log**
```text
99.99.44.44 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:41 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
188.138.60.101 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:48 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
46.50.21.83 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:02 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Python/Requests 22.01"
99.99.44.44 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:25 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
91.239.186.133 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:04 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
173.203.139.108 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:08 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
80.91.33.133 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:04 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Rust/reqwest 0.3"
93.190.71.150 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:33 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
91.234.194.89 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:57 +0000] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
46.4.83.163 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:20 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 304 0 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
173.203.139.108 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:39 +0000] "GET /downloads/materialized HTTP/1.1" 404 335 "-" "Python/Requests 22"
```

#### `TEXT` format

To create a source that ingests these logs and allows you to do some
quick and dirty analysis:

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED SOURCE frontend_logs
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING 'logs/202?/**/*.log' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'frontend'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT TEXT;
```

From here, you can e.g. get all the lines that include the string `updates`, ordered by the original position of the line in the file (`mz_record`):

```sql
SELECT mz_record,
       text
FROM frontend_logs
WHERE text LIKE '%updates%'
ORDER BY mz_record;

 mz_record |                                     text
 1         | 99.99.44.44 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:59] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
 7         | 37.26.93.214 - - [12/31/2020:23:55:52] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 3318 "-" "Go_1.1_package_http"
 8         | 99.99.44.44 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:41] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
 9         | 188.138.60.101 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:48] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
 12        | 91.239.186.133 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:04] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
 15        | 93.190.71.150 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:33] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
 16        | 91.234.194.89 - - [01/01/2021:00:00:57] "GET /updates HTTP/1.1" 200 10020 "-" "Python/Requests_22"
```

#### `REGEX` format

It's generally more convenient to work with well-structured columnar data, so you
can use the `REGEX` format specifier instead:

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED SOURCE frontend_logs
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING 'logs/202?/**/*.log' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'frontend'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT REGEX '(?P<ip>[^ ]+) - - \[?P<dt>([^]]_)\] "(?P<method>\w+) (?P<path>[^ ]+)[^"]+" (?P<status>\d+) (?P<content_length>\d+) "-" "(?P<user_agent>[^"]+)"';
```

From here, you can e.g. get all the lines that have `/updates` as the exact path:

```sql
SELECT dt,
       ip,
       user_agent
FROM frontend_logs
WHERE path = '/updates';

       dt           |      ip        |    user_agent
01/01/2021:00:00:04 | 91.239.186.133 | Python/Requests 22
01/01/2021:00:00:33 | 93.190.71.150  | Python/Requests 22
01/01/2021:00:00:41 | 99.99.44.44    | Python/Requests 22
01/01/2021:00:00:48 | 188.138.60.101 | Python/Requests 22
01/01/2021:00:00:57 | 91.234.194.89  | Python/Requests 22
12/31/2020:23:55:52 | 37.26.93.214   | Go 1.1 package http
12/31/2020:23:55:59 | 99.99.44.44    | Python/Requests 22
```

{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab "CSV">}}

#### With a CSV header

Assuming there is an S3 bucket `analytics` that contains the following keys and
associated content:

**users/2021/engagement-with-header.csv**
```csv
id,status,active time
9999,active,8 hours
888,inactive,
777,active,3 hours
```

**users/2020/engagement-with-header.csv**
```csv
id,status,active time
9999,active,750 hours
888,inactive,
777,active,1002 hours
```

To validate and remove header rows
when reading from an S3 bucket, you can use the `FORMAT CSV WITH HEADER (column, column2, ...)` syntax. The column names are required for S3 sources, unlike file sources.
To load all the keys:

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED SOURCE csv_example (user_id, status, usage) -- provide SQL names
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.csv' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT CSV WITH HEADER (id, status, "active time"); -- expect a header for each file with these names
```

#### Without a CSV header

Assuming there is an S3 bucket `analytics` that contains the following keys and
associated content:

**users/2021/engagement.csv**
```csv
9999,active,8 hours
888,inactive,
777,active,3 hours
```

**users/2020/engagement.csv**
```csv
9999,active,750 hours
888,inactive,
777,active,1002 hours
```

To load all the keys:

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED SOURCE csv_example (user_id, status, usage)
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.csv' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT CSV WITH 3 COLUMNS;
```

This creates a source that...

- Scans the entire `analytics` bucket looking for objects that have keys ending with `*.csv`
- Has three *text* columns: `user_id`, `status`, and `usage`; and one automatically-generated
  *integer* column (`mz_record`) which reflects the order that materialized first encountered that
  row in.

  Lines in any object that do not have three columns will be ignored and an error-level message
  will be written to the Materialize log.
- Materializes the contents in memory immediately upon issuing the command.

To handle well-typed data while stripping out some uninteresting columns, you can
instead write an unmaterialized source and parse columns in a materialized view:

```sql
CREATE SOURCE csv_source (user_id, status, usage)
  FROM S3 DISCOVER OBJECTS MATCHING '**/*.csv' USING
    BUCKET SCAN 'analytics'
  WITH (region = 'us-east-2')
  FORMAT CSV WITH 3 COLUMNS;
```

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW csv_example AS
  SELECT user_id::int4,
         usage::interval
  FROM csv_source;
```

This creates a view that has the same properties as above, except it...

- Has two columns (one *integer*, one *interval*)
- Does not store the string data in memory after it's been parsed.

{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Known limitations

##### Supported envelopes

S3 sources are append-only, which means that Materialize silently ignores any deleted or updated objects.

##### Ordering guarantees

Object ingest order is not guaranteed, and Materialize may interleave multiple object ingestion to speed things up.

## Related pages

- [`CREATE SOURCE`](../)
- [`CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW`](../../create-view)
- [`SELECT`](../../select)

[JSON]: /sql/create-source/#json
[Text/bytes]: /sql/create-source/#textbytes
[CSV]: /sql/create-source/#csv

[Append-only envelope]: /sql/create-source/#append-only-envelope
[Upsert envelope]: /sql/create-source/#upsert-envelope
[Debezium envelope]: /sql/create-source/#debezium-envelope
