doc/user/content/sql/create-index.md, before:

---
title: "CREATE INDEX"
description: "`CREATE INDEX` creates an in-memory index on a source or view."
menu:
  # This should also have a "non-content entry" under Reference, which is
  # configured in doc/user/config.toml
  main:
    parent: 'commands'
---

`CREATE INDEX` creates an in-memory index on a source or view.

-   For materialized views, this creates additional indexes.
-   For non-materialized views, it converts them into materialized views.

## Conceptual framework

Indexes assemble and maintain in memory a query's results, which can
provide future queries the data they need pre-arranged in a format they can immediately use.
In particular, this can be very helpful for the [`JOIN`](../join) operator which needs
to build and maintain the appropriate indexes if they do not otherwise exist.
For more information, see [Key Concepts: Indexes](/overview/key-concepts/#indexes).

### When to create indexes

You might want to create indexes when...

-   You want to use non-primary keys (e.g. foreign keys) as a join condition.
    In this case, you could create an index on the columns in the join condition.
-   You want to convert a non-materialized view or source to a materialized view or source.
-   You want to speed up searches filtering by literal values or expressions.

## Syntax

{{< diagram "create-index.svg" >}}

Field | Use
------|-----
**DEFAULT** | Creates a default index with the same structure as the index automatically created with [**CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW**](/sql/create-materialized-view). This provides a simple method to convert a non-materialized object to a materialized one.
_index&lowbar;name_ | A name for the index.
_obj&lowbar;name_ | The name of the source or view on which you want to create an index.
_method_ | The name of the index method to use. The only supported method is [`arrangement`](/overview/arrangements).
_col&lowbar;expr_**...** | The expressions to use as the key for the index.
_field_ | The name of the option you want to set.
_val_ | The value for the option.

{{< version-changed v0.7.1 >}}
The `WITH (field = val, ...)` clause was added to allow setting index options
when creating the index.
{{</ version-changed >}}

{{< version-added v0.23.0 >}}
The `USING` clause.
{{</ version-added >}}

### `WITH` options

The following option is valid within the `WITH` clause:

{{% index-with-options %}}

## Details

### Restrictions

-   You can only reference the columns available in the `SELECT` list of the query
    that defines the view. For example, if your view was defined as `SELECT a, b FROM src`, you can only reference columns `a` and `b`, even if `src` contains
    additional columns.

-   You cannot exclude any columns from being in the index's "value" set. For
    example, if your view is defined as `SELECT a, b FROM ...`, all indexes will
    contain `{a, b}` as their values.

    If you want to create an index that only stores a subset of these columns,
    consider creating another materialized view that uses `SELECT some_subset FROM this_view...`.

### Structure

Indexes in Materialize have the following structure for each unique row:

```nofmt
((tuple of indexed expressions), (tuple of the row, i.e. stored columns))
```

#### Indexed expressions vs. stored columns

Automatically created indexes will use all columns as key expressions for the
index, unless Materialize is provided or can infer a unique key for the source
or view.

For instance, unique keys can be...

-   **Provided** by the schema provided for the source, e.g. through the Confluent
    Schema Registry.
-   **Inferred** when the query...
    -   Concludes with a `GROUP BY`.
    -   Uses sources or views that have a unique key without damaging this property.
        For example, joining a view with unique keys against a second, where the join
        constraint uses foreign keys.

When creating your own indexes, you can choose the indexed expressions.

### Memory footprint

The in-memory sizes of indexes are proportional to the current size of the source
or view they represent. The actual amount of memory required depends on several
details related to the rate of compaction and the representation of the types of
data in the source or view. We are working on a feature to let you see the size
each index consumes {{% gh 1532 %}}.

Creating an index may also force the first materialization of a view, which may
cause Materialize to install a dataflow to determine and maintain the results of
the view. This dataflow may have a memory footprint itself, in addition to that
of the index.

## Examples

### Optimizing joins with indexes

You can optimize the performance of `JOIN` on two relations by ensuring their
join keys are the key columns in an index.

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW active_customers AS
    SELECT guid, geo_id, last_active_on
    FROM customer_source
    WHERE last_active_on > now() - INTERVAL '30' DAYS;

CREATE INDEX active_customers_geo_idx ON active_customers (geo_id);

CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW active_customer_per_geo AS
    SELECT geo.name, count(*)
    FROM geo_regions AS geo
    JOIN active_customers ON active_customers.geo_id = geo.id
    GROUP BY geo.name;
```

In the above example, the index `active_customers_geo_idx`...

-   Helps us because it contains a key that the view `active_customer_per_geo` can
    use to look up values for the join condition (`active_customers.geo_id`).

    Because this index is exactly what the query requires, the Materialize
    optimizer will choose to use `active_customers_geo_idx` rather than build
    and maintain a private copy of the index just for this query.

-   Obeys our restrictions by containing only a subset of columns in the result
    set.

### Materializing views

You can convert a non-materialized view into a materialized view by adding an
index to it.

```sql
CREATE VIEW active_customers AS
    SELECT guid, geo_id, last_active_on
    FROM customer_source
    WHERE last_active_on > now() - INTERVAL '30' DAYS;

CREATE INDEX active_customers_primary_idx ON active_customers (guid);
```

Note that this index is different than the primary index that Materialize would
automatically create if you had used `CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW`. Indexes that
are automatically created contain an index of all columns in the result set,
unless they contain a unique key. (Remember that indexes store a copy of a
row's indexed columns _and_ a copy of the entire row.)

### Speed up filtering with indexes

You can set up an index over a column were filtering by literal values or expressions are common to improve the performance.

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW active_customers AS
    SELECT guid, geo_id, last_active_on
    FROM customer_source
    GROUP BY geo_id;

CREATE INDEX active_customers_idx ON active_customers (guid);

SELECT * FROM active_customers WHERE guid = 'd868a5bf-2430-461d-a665-40418b1125e7';

-- Using expressions
CREATE INDEX active_customers_exp_idx ON active_customers (upper(guid));

SELECT * FROM active_customers WHERE upper(guid) = 'D868A5BF-2430-461D-A665-40418B1125E7';

-- Filter using an expression in one field and a literal in another field
CREATE INDEX active_customers_exp_field_idx ON active_customers (upper(guid), geo_id);

SELECT * FROM active_customers WHERE upper(guid) = 'D868A5BF-2430-461D-A665-40418B1125E7' and geo_id = 'ID_8482';
```

Create an index with an expression to improve query performance over a frequent used expression and
avoid building downstream views to apply the function like the one used in the example: `upper()`.
Take into account that aggregations like `count()` are not possible to use as expressions.

## Related pages

-   [`SHOW INDEX`](../show-index)
-   [`DROP INDEX`](../drop-index)

Commit message:

doc: document clusters and cluster replicas

doc/user/content/sql/create-index.md, after:

---
title: "CREATE INDEX"
description: "`CREATE INDEX` creates an in-memory index on a source or view."
menu:
  # This should also have a "non-content entry" under Reference, which is
  # configured in doc/user/config.toml
  main:
    parent: 'commands'
---

`CREATE INDEX` creates an in-memory index on a source or view.

-   For materialized views, this creates additional indexes.
-   For non-materialized views, it converts them into materialized views.

## Conceptual framework

Indexes assemble and maintain a query's results in memory, which can
provide future queries the data they need in a format they can immediately use.

In particular, manually creating indexes can be very helpful for the
[`JOIN`](../join) operator which needs to build and maintain the appropriate
indexes if they do not otherwise exist. For more information, see [Key Concepts:
Indexes](/overview/key-concepts/#indexes).

### When to create indexes

You might want to create indexes when...

-   You want to use non-primary keys (e.g. foreign keys) as a join condition.
    In this case, you could create an index on the columns in the join condition.
-   You want to convert a non-materialized view or source to a materialized view or source.
-   You want to speed up searches filtering by literal values or expressions.

### Indexes + clusters

Materialize maintains indexes using dataflows. Each dataflow must belong to a
[cluster](/overview/key-concepts#clusters).

## Syntax

{{< diagram "create-index.svg" >}}

Field | Use
------|-----
**DEFAULT** | Creates a default index with the same structure as the index automatically created with [**CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW**](/sql/create-materialized-view). This provides a simple method to convert a non-materialized object to a materialized one.
_index&lowbar;name_ | A name for the index.
_obj&lowbar;name_ | The name of the source or view on which you want to create an index.
_cluster_name_ | The [cluster](/sql/create-cluster) to maintain this index. If not provided, uses the session's `cluster` variable.
_method_ | The name of the index method to use. The only supported method is [`arrangement`](/overview/arrangements).
_col&lowbar;expr_**...** | The expressions to use as the key for the index.
_field_ | The name of the option you want to set.
_val_ | The value for the option.

{{< version-changed v0.7.1 >}}
The `WITH (field = val, ...)` clause was added to allow setting index options
when creating the index.
{{</ version-changed >}}

{{< version-added v0.23.0 >}}
The `USING` clause.
{{</ version-added >}}

### `WITH` options

The following option is valid within the `WITH` clause:

{{% index-with-options %}}

## Details

### Restrictions

-   You can only reference the columns available in the `SELECT` list of the query
    that defines the view. For example, if your view was defined as `SELECT a, b FROM src`, you can only reference columns `a` and `b`, even if `src` contains
    additional columns.

-   You cannot exclude any columns from being in the index's "value" set. For
    example, if your view is defined as `SELECT a, b FROM ...`, all indexes will
    contain `{a, b}` as their values.

    If you want to create an index that only stores a subset of these columns,
    consider creating another materialized view that uses `SELECT some_subset FROM this_view...`.

### Structure

Indexes in Materialize have the following structure for each unique row:

```nofmt
((tuple of indexed expressions), (tuple of the row, i.e. stored columns))
```

#### Indexed expressions vs. stored columns

Automatically created indexes will use all columns as key expressions for the
index, unless Materialize is provided or can infer a unique key for the source
or view.

For instance, unique keys can be...

-   **Provided** by the schema provided for the source, e.g. through the Confluent
    Schema Registry.
-   **Inferred** when the query...
    -   Concludes with a `GROUP BY`.
    -   Uses sources or views that have a unique key without damaging this property.
        For example, joining a view with unique keys against a second, where the join
        constraint uses foreign keys.

When creating your own indexes, you can choose the indexed expressions.

### Memory footprint

The in-memory sizes of indexes are proportional to the current size of the source
or view they represent. The actual amount of memory required depends on several
details related to the rate of compaction and the representation of the types of
data in the source or view. We are working on a feature to let you see the size
each index consumes {{% gh 1532 %}}.

Creating an index may also force the first materialization of a view, which may
cause Materialize to install a dataflow to determine and maintain the results of
the view. This dataflow may have a memory footprint itself, in addition to that
of the index.

## Examples

### Optimizing joins with indexes

You can optimize the performance of `JOIN` on two relations by ensuring their
join keys are the key columns in an index.

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW active_customers AS
    SELECT guid, geo_id, last_active_on
    FROM customer_source
    WHERE last_active_on > now() - INTERVAL '30' DAYS;

CREATE INDEX active_customers_geo_idx ON active_customers (geo_id);

CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW active_customer_per_geo AS
    SELECT geo.name, count(*)
    FROM geo_regions AS geo
    JOIN active_customers ON active_customers.geo_id = geo.id
    GROUP BY geo.name;
```

In the above example, the index `active_customers_geo_idx`...

-   Helps us because it contains a key that the view `active_customer_per_geo` can
    use to look up values for the join condition (`active_customers.geo_id`).

    Because this index is exactly what the query requires, the Materialize
    optimizer will choose to use `active_customers_geo_idx` rather than build
    and maintain a private copy of the index just for this query.

-   Obeys our restrictions by containing only a subset of columns in the result
    set.

### Materializing views

You can convert a non-materialized view into a materialized view by adding an
index to it.

```sql
CREATE VIEW active_customers AS
    SELECT guid, geo_id, last_active_on
    FROM customer_source
    WHERE last_active_on > now() - INTERVAL '30' DAYS;

CREATE INDEX active_customers_primary_idx ON active_customers (guid);
```

Note that this index is different than the primary index that Materialize would
automatically create if you had used `CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW`. Indexes that
are automatically created contain an index of all columns in the result set,
unless they contain a unique key. (Remember that indexes store a copy of a
row's indexed columns _and_ a copy of the entire row.)

### Speed up filtering with indexes

You can set up an index over a column were filtering by literal values or expressions are common to improve the performance.

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW active_customers AS
    SELECT guid, geo_id, last_active_on
    FROM customer_source
    GROUP BY geo_id;

CREATE INDEX active_customers_idx ON active_customers (guid);

SELECT * FROM active_customers WHERE guid = 'd868a5bf-2430-461d-a665-40418b1125e7';

-- Using expressions
CREATE INDEX active_customers_exp_idx ON active_customers (upper(guid));

SELECT * FROM active_customers WHERE upper(guid) = 'D868A5BF-2430-461D-A665-40418B1125E7';

-- Filter using an expression in one field and a literal in another field
CREATE INDEX active_customers_exp_field_idx ON active_customers (upper(guid), geo_id);

SELECT * FROM active_customers WHERE upper(guid) = 'D868A5BF-2430-461D-A665-40418B1125E7' and geo_id = 'ID_8482';
```

Create an index with an expression to improve query performance over a frequent used expression and
avoid building downstream views to apply the function like the one used in the example: `upper()`.
Take into account that aggregations like `count()` are not possible to use as expressions.

## Related pages

-   [`SHOW INDEX`](../show-index)
-   [`DROP INDEX`](../drop-index)
